2017 - WannaCry ransomware attack.

What: 
WannaCry ransomware cryptoworm, which targeted computers running the Microsoft Windows operating system by encrypting data and demanding ransom payments in the Bitcoin cryptocurrency.
The payload displays a message informing the user that their files have been encrypted, and demands a payment of around US$300 - $600 in bitcoin within 3 to 7 days while warning that
"you have not so enough time.”

What is The Effect: 
The cryptoworm includes a transport mechanism to automatically spread itself. This transport code scans for vulnerable systems, then uses the EternalBlue exploit to gain access, and 
the DoublePulsar tool to install and execute a copy of itself. WannaCry versions 0, 1, and 2 were created using Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0. It estimates that around 200,000 computers 
were infected across 150 countries including computers, MRI scanners, blood-storage refrigerators and theatre equipment. Manufacturing companies halted production after the ransomware
infected some of their systems. Renault also stopped production at several sites to stop the spread of the ransomware. Economic losses from the cyber-attack were estimated to reach up
to US $4 billion

How It did happen: 
EternalBlue is an exploit of Microsoft's implementation of their Server Message Block (SMB) protocol through an exposed vulnerable SMB port. The U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) 
(from whom the exploit was likely stolen) had already discovered the vulnerability, but used it to create an exploit for its own offensive work, rather than report it to Microsoft. 
Microsoft eventually discovered the vulnerability, and on Tuesday, 14 March 2017, they issued security bulletin MS17-010, which detailed the flaw and announced that patches had been
released for all Windows versions that were currently supported at that time, 

How they solve the problem: 
Microsoft released patches to close the exploit, but older systems were affected still. Security bulletin MS17-010 which detailed the flaw and announced that patches had been released
for all Windows versions that were currently supported at that time. Days Later Microsoft released out-of-band security updates for end of life products Windows XP, Windows Server 
2003 and Windows 8
 
Steps
Researcher Marcus Hutchins discovered the kill switch domain hardcoded in the malware Registering a domain name for a DNS sinkhole stopped the attack spreading as a worm, because the 
ransomware only encrypted the computer's files if it was unable to connect to that domain, which all computers infected with WannaCry before the website's registration had been unable 
to do. While this did not help already infected systems, it severely slowed the spread of the initial infection and gave time for defensive measures to be deployed worldwide, 
particularly in North America and Asia, which had not been attacked to the same extent as elsewhere. 
 
Response and action by attackers:
•	 On 14 May, a first variant of WannaCry appeared with a new and second kill-switch registered by Matt Suiche on the same day.
•	 This was followed by a second variant with the third and last kill-switch on 15 May, which was registered by Check Point threat intelligence analysts. 
•	 A few days later, a new version of WannaCry was detected that lacked the kill switch altogether
 
Then
On 19 May, it was reported that hackers were trying to use a Mirai botnet variant to effect a distributed denial-of-service attack on WannaCry's kill-switch domain with the intention 
of knocking it offline. On 22 May, Hutchins protected the domain by switching to a cached version of the site, capable of dealing with much higher traffic loads than the live site. 
 
How It Was Finally Eliminated
Separately, researchers from University College London and Boston University reported that their PayBreak system could defeat WannaCry and several other families of ransomware by 
recovering the keys used to encrypt the user's data. It was discovered that Windows encryption APIs used by WannaCry may not completely clear the prime numbers used to generate the 
payload's private keys from the memory, making it potentially possible to retrieve the required key if they had not yet been overwritten or cleared from resident memory. The key is 
kept in the memory if the WannaCry process has not been killed and the computer has not been rebooted after being infected. This behaviour was used by a French researcher to develop 
a tool known as WannaKey, which automates this process on Windows XP systems. This approach was iterated upon by a second tool known as Wanakiwi, which was tested to work on 
Windows 7 and Server 2008 R2 as well. Within four days of the initial outbreak, new infections had slowed to a trickle due to these responses. 

Source From <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack> 

How to prevent: 
1.	Update your software and operating system regularly
2.	Do not click on suspicious links
3.	Do not open untrusted suspicious links
4.	Do not open untrusted email attachments
5.	Do not download from untrusted websites
6.	Avoid usage of unknown USB 
7.	Install internet security software
8.	Install and update internet security software
9.	Backup data
